Ngolo-fuzzing
======

Ngolo-fuzzing is a tool to generate automatically a fuzz target against a golang package.

Motivation
------

The purpose of ngolo-fuzzing is to automate the generation of a fuzz target, without human assistance.
It is not meant to generate an optimized fuzz target, but a complete one, in terms of code coverage.

Usage
------

Simply :
`./ngolo-fuzzing github.com/catenacyber/ngolo-fuzzing/duggy`

More completely :
`./ngolo-fuzzing -exlude Must,Expand regexp outdir`

Ngolo-fuzzing requires one argument : the name of the golang package against which to create the fuzz target.

Ngolo-fuzzing can have a second argument, a name of a directory where to output the results, default is `fuzz_ng`.

Ngolo-fuzzing has one argument `exclude` to exclude from fuzzing functions containing (as in `strings.Contains`) a list of patterns separated by commas.

Output
------

Ngolo-fuzzing will output two files in the output directory :
- A protobuf file named ngolofuzz.proto, describing the golang package API
- A golang file fuzz_ng.go containing the fuzz targets, ie the `Fuzz` functions

Compile and run the fuzzer
------

Ngolo-fuzzing simply generates the golang code for the fuzz target. It does not compile it.
To get a fuzzer running, you also need to run
```
# generate fuzz_ng.pb.go out of ngolofuzz.proto
protoc --go_out=./ ngolofuzz.proto
# Use go114-fuzz-build to build a static library
go114-fuzz-build -func FuzzNG_unsure -o fuzz_ng.a ./fuzz_ng
# link with libFuzzer
$CXX $CXXFLAGS $LIB_FUZZING_ENGINE fuzz_ng.a -o fuzz_ng
```

You can also use libprotobuf-mutator in the compiling scheme cf lpm/ngolofuzz.cc...

To get a debug output when you have a crash, you can run the fuzzer on the crash input with environment variable `FUZZ_NG_REPRODUCER` set to a file name to be written.
In this file, there will be written the list of functions called with their arguments.

Status
------

This is now a working Proof Of Concept.
It is working against many packages of the standard library but not all of them.
Even when it is working against a package (ie it produces a valid fuzz target), the fuzz target is not always complete in terms of coverage.
Warnings are printed out to show what is not covered, like usage of `io.ReaderWriterCloser` in an argument, or a function as an argument cf `ast.FuncType`.

Ngolo-fuzzing assumes that the golang package being fuzzed is not meant to panic with a list of calls of its functions.
This assumption is obviously wrong, cf `regexp.MustCompile`.
It is also wrong for functions not mentioning `panic` in its documentation like `regexp.Expand`.
Current workaround is to (manually) exclude these functions from the fuzz target with the `exclude` option of `ngolo-fuzzing`.

How does it work ?
------

* Why Golang ?

Golang makes this easy with
- Providing an `ast` package in its standard library to parse the golang package
- Using a garbage collector, so the fuzz target does not need to care about releasing the resources it created.

* Why Protobuf ?

Protobuf allows to describe a golang package interface, by describing the list of functions with their arguments.
There may be other options, like go-fuzz-headers, that could work.

Protobuf unserialization, or libprotobuf-mutator, will generate a structure out of the fuzzing input as bytes.
This structure is a list of enum/union of each function, described by its arguments.

One function's argument can either be :
- natively described by protobuf like `uint32`
- can be generated out of a native types of protobuf like using `strings.NewReader` to get a `io.RuneReader` out of a `string` from protobuf
- can be generated by the package, as a return of a function. The fuzz target stores these results for reuse.

TODOs
------

* Implement a tool to generate a corpus element out of a golang main program (make a protobuf out of parsing ast)
* Complete the print function get the complete program cf `FUZZ_NG_REPRODUCER`
* Add tests
* Complete duggy for testing
* Check all std library builds (like implement `io.ReadWriterCloser`)
* Implement a more focused version on only one function, building the necessary arguments for it through code generation if needed

